>> Good afternoon everyone.
I'm Ben Trumbull I'm an Engineering Manager in Core
Data and Developer Tools and I'm going to be presenting
about designing Cocoa applications for concurrency.
So we're going to talk a little bit about the different
design challenges faced with writing multi-threaded code
and in particular we're going to put up with a lot of this
complexity because we're interested in better performance.
So we want more responsiveness from our applications.
We want more raw speed and we also want to use the resource
of the computer all these extra cores more efficiently
and we're going to take that time saved and we're going
to spend it on new features of a better user experience,
unless you just like making things faster.
And one of the particular challenges is faced is how big
to split up your application into the separate pieces.
If the pieces are too big you're not
going to get very much concurrency.
Obviously if you only one piece you're not going to get any.
At the same point in time if you flip over to the other
extreme and the pieces are too small then you're going
to have more overhead and more complexity.
So in particular the focus of this session is on finding
the right granularity for the tasks that you're going
to be offloading to other threads or other queues
and so in this case we're going to be a little bit
like Goldilocks, not too big, not too small.
And the perfect task granularity varies for everybody but
it's going to be limited by the amount of overhead each
of your individual tasks incur and this is particularly
due to the coordination mechanisms that you're going to use
to manage these tasks and the amount of resource
contention these tasks start incurring as they operate.
So in this session we're going to overview
a cast of characters so define some terms.
We're going to review some of the coordination
mechanism that are typically used in most programs.
Examine a variety of resource contention
issues where this is really going
to impact how fast your tasks can operate
independently and then sort of sum that together
in looking at how to balance a task granularity.
And then we're going to explore two particular
issues that impact a lot of Cocoa applications
as multi-thread notifications and
general DUI layer and these are issues
that tend to trip up a lot of Cocoa developers.
So for our cast of characters there's some
basic introductions and the terms that I'm going
to be using throughout the presentation I assume you're
probably familiar with most of them but a little quick
over view on tasks, threads, the difference between dispatch
queues and NSOperation queues, locks, atomic operations
and this thing that pops up every
once and now again called futures.
So, tasks in computer science mean a lot of different things
and for the purposes of this presentation I'm just going
to refer to a unit of work and
there's a distinct grouping of code.
It might be executed either by a thread or a dispatch queue;
this would be for instance a block on a dispatch queue
or an NSOperation object within an NS operation queue.
And for the thread this is going
to be the main function typically.
So we're not going to refer to
something like a process or an NSTask.
Threads: I assume you all know what threads
are but they're something of the protagonist
or perhaps the antagonist of our presentation today.
So this is your thread of execution, an independent
flow control and its key distinguishing feature is
that it has a shared address space with all the other
threads and this is what makes them different from processes
and this is a really powerful feature of threads but it's
also their Achilles heel and we're going to spend most
of the presentation resisting the urge
to leverage this feature too much.
So dispatch queues: This is Grand Central
Dispatch and this is new in Snow Leopard.
They are easier and more efficient than threads.
It's basically a way of coordinating different work units.
There are three separate presentations on dispatch
queues this week so I'm not going to go in too heavily
on what exactly they are other than they're a
way of managing and enqueuing different tasks
and in addition Grand Central Dispatch has a library of
common operations that you would have to write your own code
for if you're working directly with
threads so they're really very convenient.
Operation Queues: This is NSOperationQueue.
It's a Cocoa API for work queues so you're basically
enqueuing tasks similarly to Grand Central Dispatch
and on Snow Leopard it's built
on top of Grand Central Dispatch.
One thing to note is this is available actually on 10.5
and also on iPhone OS without Grand Central Dispatch
and it builds some additional functionalities and dependancy
analysis and some conveniences that the Cocoa layer on top
of Grand Central Dispatch on Snow Leopard.
So locks are one of our primary
mechanisms for coordinating between tasks.
They're a simple way of excluding resources from being over
used so they typically prevent just one thread at a time
and there's going to be a wide
range available for you to use.
Atomic operations are basically
hardware supported primitives.
They're typically basic arithmetic
or bit shifting instructions,
plus compare and swap is another very common one, and
one way to think about it is if the destination address
of your complication basically had a teeny tiny
encapsulated lock in it and that's kind of how they behave.
So when you add something together atomically the address
of that summation is going to act like its own lock.
And then futures are place holders that
get passed around for an unknown value.
They're typically returned by asynchronous APIs and
they're used to improve the responsiveness of these APIs.
They're a little bit like a coat check ticket.
You don't necessarily need something back
right away but you do need a handle back to it.
So there won't be any blocking
until you absolutely need them.
So that brings us to the first section in which we're going
to use these terms and this is the coordination mechanisms
that are going to help us coordinate between all the tasks
we create within our application and they're also going
to represent some of the cost of having separate tasks.
And the reason why we have all of these
different coordination mechanisms is
to address some problems we're experiencing with threads.
First of all as you're no doubt aware
of threads are very non-deterministic.
The execution between threads is interleafed pretty
chaotically and sharing resources and data between threads
without extra steps is going to have a
lot of side effects in your application.
So this is just with two threads and this is just with
2 to 32 instructions and you can see that the number
of different interleavings between
threads is growing exponentially.
I don't know about you but most of my threads do more than
32 instructions and already this has gotten out of hand.
So our goals of coordination are going to be to prune the
complexity back from our application to reduce the amount
of non-determinism that using all these threads
induces and to safely share resources between threads.
That brings us to locking which is going to be the simplest
and most frequent form of coordinating between tasks.
For preventing simultaneous access either
to a resource or to a second of code
and it's it's really the most prevalent,
it's very easy to use.
Unfortunately, it does have the
disadvantage that we have a lot
of locks together you find yourself prone to deadlocking.
Some of the common locks that you'll find on Mac OS X
are the @synchronized keyword and the objective sealing
with itself, NSLock in Cocoa, OSSpinlock in the
kernel offered by OS Atomic and the ptthread library
which has a reader writer lock and a bunch of other things.
Now from a design perspective most of the locks are going
to behave fairly similarly in terms of a strategic level.
Tactically they have very different performance
characteristics and some of them have different features.
Obviously ReaderWriterLock is doing something
a little bit different than a spinlock
but for the most part you can learn about these things
in the Mac OS X Threading Programming Guide which will go
into a lot of detail about the different
locks you have available to you on Mac OS X.
So I mentioned that having lots of
independent locks is prone to deadlock
and so what do I mean by an independent lock?
And this is when you have locks that you can
acquire and release in any order and you can call
out to other pieces of code while you hold these locks.
So these locks don't really have any
dependencies between each other, they stand apart
and a thread can accumulate multiple of these locks.
So this thread for instance can have both Lock 1 and Lock
2 at the same time and can be used in code that depends
of those locks and it can release
them later whenever it feels like.
This is contrast to an encapsulated lock where an
encapsulated lock is something that's hiding behind API
and it's going to be released when that API returns.
So it's released at the end of the scope and one of the
key features is there's no call out to arbitrary code.
So this makes it impossible for a thread to hold onto
multiple different encapsulated locks at the same time
and as you might imagine this is going to make
it much easier to avoid problems like deadlock.
Specifically, if you end up being able to take
different locks and then calling out to arbitrary code
which might need more locks you
find yourself in the situation
where multiple threads might have say half
the locks they need to get their job done.
So this is a fairly text book deadlock where 1
thread has the first lock and it needs two locks
and the other thread is holding on to that second lock.
As an aside, for extra style points it is
possible to deadlock yourself on a single thread
and this is a common problem with
spinlocks because they're non-recursive
if you hold a spinlock and then
you call out to arbitrary code.
If that code just starts calling back into you,
which is fairly common in object oriented
programming, you have managed to deadlock yourself.
So the most frequent way managing all these
independent locks is something called lock ordering.
If the problem with deadlocking is we're requiring
multiple locks in an inconsistent order and we need
to define an order and sort of build a protocol
in which sort of on the honor system if you will.
We're going to acquire the locks in a fixed order
and then we release them in the opposite order
and in this way these two threads now, are both using
the two locks but actually cannot deadlock each other.
So this works and we can build up more locks
but there's some obvious limitations to it.
You have to use this locking protocol all the
time consistently and it can be a little fragile
when you're maintaining large code
bases; your adding new features.
For example one thread might think
it only needs the second lock.
So it doesn't necessarily grab the first lock all the
time and then later on you add more code and that piece
of code is calling out to your new feature which it does
in fact use the first lock and so
you you've broken the protocol.
So in this way you probably want to avoid having more
than two independent locks participating in any kind
of lock ordering scheme just to
keep in mind some of the limits
as you develop your application,
add new features and what not.
As an aside, the reason why it's two as
opposed to three is because three is too many.
Yes and so some some years ago I worked on a different
project and I was tasked with adding multi-threading support
to an existing frame work which is also something you
probably shouldn't do because there there's a bunch
of API already in place and you have an
architecture that's already in place.
So it can be very difficult to design
properly multi-threading in that environment.
But one of the key issues was that there were three
separate resources that all needed independent locks
and because they were different layers in this API it was
very difficult for these locks to participate in any kind
of fixed ordering in particular different
layers didn't necessarily even know what kind
of locks the other layers had.
So it it got to be very difficult and I
spent many months, six months or something,
this was a long time ago so my memory is a little hazy.
But I basically spent an entire release cycle debugging
this this one set of issues, these multi-threading issues.
So three is definitely too many locks.
And here's sort of a graphic that I'd wished when I was
younger that I had sat down to think about and here we go
from four different permutations of locking with two
locks and two threads to eighteen permutation of how all
of these locks might be acquired
with three locks and three threads.
So you can also see again and this is sort of
reoccurring theme with multi-threading that the complexity
of your application is going to grow exponentially
if you don't take steps to bring it back.
So the three locks have eighteen permutations and just
for fun about a third of them are going to work correctly
or well, correctly may not be the right, they will function.
So again this is going to make it more challenging to debug
multi-threaded code when you've over extended yourself.
Alright so there are going to be a bunch
of different locks available to you.
The Mac OS X Threading Programming
Guide has a wide list of them.
In general you're going to want to prefer encapsulated
locks where a lock is hidden behind an API boundary
and it doesn't allow call outs so
it will control a particular scope.
But when you need to use independent locks you're
going to want to have an order and you want
to have a protocol that you're building on top of them.
So if all of these independent locks aren't
going to scale very well to having lots
and lots of them we have another
technique to use and this is sort
of the antithesis of locking and it's called isolation.
And the goal here is like locks to turn a very complex
set of interactions between tasks into something else.
In particular this is something fairly simple.
If you imagine a single thread spawns off
four subtasks which then rendezvous back
with a result this is something I feel much more confident
about debugging and at the same point in time we can see
that you can actually get some real concurrency out of it.
And one of the key points to note is these
subtasks are not talking to each other.
So they're not locking.
They they really have no particular interaction.
They're quite independent.
But in the real world we do have some constraints
and sometimes that's not always possible.
So at least here we have four separate clusters and
well the subtasks are not necessarily perfectly isolated
at least these clusters are isolated and we have the
opportunity to focus our debugging efforts within a cluster
and not have to worry so much about what
other threads in other clusters are doing
because they're not going to be changing our state.
So we're going to focus on sub dividing a
multi-thread application into set a serial pieces
to reduce our complexity and in this
way isolation to concurrency a lot
like encapsulation is to object oriented programming.
This is a pretty fundamental technique when
basically what we're talking about doing is trying
to keep all these threads from
interacting directly with each other.
It's also called confinement and we're going
to and the reason for that is we're going
to confine resources scope to a specific thread.
So other threads are not going to have direct
arbitrary shared memory access to those resources.
They're going to have to enqueue
requests formally by a specific channel.
Now this comes up to if we're not going to be doing
locking between these tasks what are we going to do
with the shared structures is the task we're working
with and the first approach is more tractable than a lot
of people might think and that's we're going to give each
of these subtasks their own copy of the data to work on.
That's not always practical but it actually turns
out to be more reasonable than you might imagine.
The other alternative is to basically create
a resource centric view of a particular task.
So instead of having a task that's owning a resource you
actually give a resource its own task and people who want
to use that resource are going to have to
enqueue requests specifically for that resource.
So those are two alternatives to doing a
lot of locking on a shared data structure.
You can see an example of this kind of pattern with the web.
Here clients and servers own their own resources.
I can't go poking around whatever NFS mounts
news.yahoo.com might be using and at the same point
in time the servers don't necessarily
know everything that my client is doing.
There's the formal communication channel that's very well
defined; http and this really allows us to encapsulate a lot
of complexity between the clients and servers.
So this is a really it's probably the most commercially
successful example of the isolation design pattern
and it's true this is for distributed computing more than
concurrent programming but this is the kind of pattern
that we're going to want to consider
bringing into our own applications.
And the nice feature about this is the servers and
the clients can themselves be very complicated.
They don't necessarily have to use isolation and
we we created clusters that are fairly independent.
So in a single web address might be backed by huge server
farm or Safari might be doing a new JavaScript engine
and it might be talking to multiple different websites
simultaneously and the servers don't need to worry
about what Safari's doing and Safari doesn't need to worry
about the server farm backing some kind of DNS striping.
So some typical examples mechanisms for this
kind of isolation: Dispatch queues themselves,
Grand Central Dispatch; each of these queues is going
to default to being serialized so each block registered
with a dispatch queue will execute in order one at a time.
So if the queue owns a resource and
nobody that is outside of that queue gets
to access it then you basically have an isolation mechanism
where the blocks will take turns using that resource.
NSOperationQueue defaults to being fully concurrent.
However you can turn the concurrency down to one
and now you've recreated the same kind of pattern
that Grand Central Dispatch is using and so
in this way any kind of resource that's owned
by a specific NSOperationQueue is going to be isolated
from concurrency that are occurring on other queues.
In Snow Leopard with Grand Central Dispatch we're
discouraging people from using thread local variables
because dispatch queues are going to be
managing a lot of these things for you
but sort of the classical old school case
thread local variables were used to hold state
that we wanted isolated from other threads.
And well not nearly as fancy, very functionally
just having a plain old context pointer pass off
to the work functions is another great way to isolate
segments of a data structure and this is the kind
of thing you can see with re-entered functions like queue -r
which is taking a context pointer
and then operating on them.
So a diagram now of isolation with queues; we
have some serial queues and you can see that each
of these queues owns a particular
resource and the tasks on each
of the queues are basically unable to
really leverage the other resource.
So for those of you who aren't quite as familiar with queues
within a particular queue these
tasks will execute and order.
So task 1, 3, and 4 are going to execute in that
order and there's no particular concurrency there.
However, there is concurrency between queues so all of
those tasks can execute concurrently with respect to task 2.
However most queues do offer the option of run
concurrently and in this case task 4 and task 6 can run
at the same time whereas task 1 and
task 3 can never run at the same time.
And in this case in order to provide isolation each of
the blocks on that queue would need their own resource.
So isolation is going to work like an API boundary
between tasks and resources are going to be confined
to particular tasks kind of like private ivars.
One of the nice features this has is it avoids any
kind of locking overhead or the potential for deadlock.
So isolated tasks do upon time actually
need to communicate with each other
and in this case they're going to
use a pattern called message passing.
This is the formal communication panel I was talking about
and it's avoiding using shared memory
to change another thread state directly.
Instead we enqueue our request and that other thread
will integrate those state changes at its leisure.
So this is the kind of pattern you see with the NSRunLoop.
It's a pattern you see in the http response cycle and
the key point is that the receiver controls message queue
so arbitrary state changes to its own objects
aren't happening out from underneath it.
So, in Cocoa, just sort of to sum up the message passing.
The main thread has a bunch of special support
for you that's very convenient; we'll
see it working later with the DUI.
In NSOperationQueue you can get a reference to the
main queue and then you can add operations to that.
With Grand Central Dispatch there's a function to get
the main queue and you can dispatch blocks to that
and then more old school all NS objects have perform main,
select, or un-thread which also works quite conveniently
and the NSRunLoop has a way of getting the main
run loop that you can add additional tasks to.
By in large most of these are actually
fairly well integrated.
So performing a selector and adding an operation
to the main queue are going to be fairly similar.
So you'll want to use whichever one is
a little more convenient to your tasks.
So, overall our goals for coordination are
going to be to prune away this complexity
that adding all these threads generates, to manage our
resources safely and typically we're going to use locks
and isolation as our as our main bread
and butter for achieving these results.
But in particular this time isn't spent doing our real work.
So we have some additional overhead that we've
added whether it's to copy data to isolate tasks,
the communicating channel or just having locks.
And so it's worth bearing in mind that locks and
communication channels are themselves resources
and this is going to introduce problems of its own.
So this is this is going to be one of the key getting
factors on how small a task we can make and that extra set
of problems that we're adding by
generating more coordination
between our tasks is basically resource contention
and this is something that a lot of people who are new
to multithread programming underestimate.
So in particular, application level tasks typically
have a lot of different resources that they're using.
This isn't quite like say open CL,
data parallelism with graphics.
Cocoa applications typically do a
mixture of a various different things.
Such as they'll have CPU intensive tasks and I/O all sort of
together bundled up and so we're going to need to be mindful
of the different kinds of things that our tasks are using.
In particular I/O and network latency are going to
create bubbles in our tasks and we're going to need
to treat locks as if they were resources as well.
So the nice thing about this is CPU scheduling
gives us a lot of support from the operating system.
Their threads which we've been using
for a long time and in Snow Leopard,
there's Grand Central Dispatch and dispatch queues.
We have in NSOperationQueues on Leopard and iPhone
OS and there's also processes which is sort of more
of an old school web server kind of way
of actually achieving a fair bit amount
of concurrency in a single machine.
So the OS gives us a lot of support here which is nice.
Unfortunately there's a lot less support
for these other kinds of resources like I/O
or locks so when we find ourselves having
to manage resources by hand one way to think
about it is sort of the airline reservation model.
Here we want to overbook a resource, at least a little
bit, because we don't want to leave resources idle.
This is time we could have spent
using that core for something else.
Or if the resource is the hard drive it's
something that another task could be doing.
So we want to keep them overbooked but we also
want to avoid overwhelming these resources.
Similarly, we can invert the problem a little bit and
we can actually leverage some of the CPU scheduling
by pairing the resource with a queue
or a thread directly and then we have
that queue is basically managing a
resource and not doing anything else.
So this is again as I mentioned a sort
of a resource centric version of a task.
And this allows us to leverage the CPU scheduling
resources that the operating system provides
in order to manage a particular resource.
And the reason why I'm focusing a lot of time on resources
here is because we have some constraints for these resources
and as we have more and more cores we
still have some limitations for instance
on network bandwidth or seek time latency on the hard drive.
But something that catches a lot of people off guard is
as we overload a resource many important
resources degrade very, very badly.
So they don't degrade linearly where you have twice
as many people using it as they should instead
of being two times slower it's much slower.
So when we look at I/O which is the beginning factor in
a lot of applications we want to keep in mind as we break
up our applications into a variety of different tasks
we don't necessarily want to chunk up the I/O in a way
that has lots of small, random access I/O.
You want to remember that sequential I/O is
going to be much faster than random axis I/O
and fewer larger requests are also
going to perform much better.
So if we create a lot of tasks and they all do some small
I/O requests we're going to start getting hit by the fact
that the hard drive has a fairly large seek time.
So if these tasks are working with different files for
instance spread out over the drive then we're going
to add a lot of extraneous bubbles into our pipeline.
And also something to keep in mind as you debug your
applications where your performance between them is
if you're doing that on desktop the
laptop drives are really much slower.
So, to give a more concrete example about these
problems with I/O and subdividing your application;
a few months ago someone came to me with a
problem in particular regarding data base I/O
and they were experiencing a really egregious slow down.
It was much much slower than it should have been.
So actually they gave me a sample.
The SQL used to talk to data base and some files and steps
to reproduce and of course it works fine on my machine,
naturally, multi-frame problems always work fine on
my machine which is why whenever possible I give them
to my engineer with the worst karma, so I
suppose in some ways that's a vicious cycle.
So, it turns out that a wee bit of
detail had been left out from the context
and that was how many other threads were performing I/O
at the same time that this data base work was going on.
So in this particular case we had thread 1 is basically
the main thread and it's responding to the user interface
and at a certain point in time the user executes a task
that causes a new subsystem to need to be easily initialized
and at this point in time there are actually two
new subsystems that need to be brought on line.
So in sort of a good design pattern these are offloaded
to separate threads so they don't block the UI.
Unfortunately these two separate patterns
are both doing a lot of I/O so what ends
up happening is not only are thread 2 and thread
3 contending over being scheduled on the CPU
but they're also interfering with each
other's access to the I/O subsystem
and basically causing the drive to seek around additionally.
So with a two line code change which is let's not spawn
the third thread at all and let's call that main function
on the second thread once we're done, its 40% faster.
So this is about basically improving
the locality of reference
that the drive is using, less seek
times and fewer contentions.
So keep in mind that just because you have eight cores
does not necessarily mean that you have eight hard drives.
If you do have eight hard drives in your RAID
system I'm very jealous and in particular for a lot
of Cocoa applications I/O is going to be
one of the more expensive tasks you perform.
So you're going to want to be careful as you
subdivide your application to be very mindful of this
and that many small random access I/O's
will be bad for sort of an inefficiency
between each of the tasks that you spawn off.
So just as we're talking about trying to find the
the just right granularity for the tasks you divide
up in your application you're also going to want to
be mindful of this similar kind of pattern for I/O
and here's the thing that is again also surprising
to many people new to multithreading and in point
of fact actually I had an Apple
engineer that he didn't believe me.
So this is something that becomes a surprise to people.
This in particular sample data from the Kernel Team
doing work on performance of locks so I responded
with whatever and so here we have one lock.
This is in fact a spinlock so it's a very,
very fast lock and it degrades quite rapidly
as you have more threads competing for it and in
fact the eight thread case is not eight times slower,
it's 50 times slower.
So this is this is huge.
This is really orders of magnitude orders
performance than we would really want.
So as we divide up our application locks are very, very
fast when you have only a couple of threads using them.
But if they're going to be a bottle
neck in your tasks then you're going
to start paying a really large performance hit for that.
So you want to keep that in mind that you
don't want to engineer your tasks in such a way
that they all are starting to hammer on the same locks.
In particular locks without contention.
So that single thread without using a lock is
only a tiny bit slower than no locking at all.
So locks are really quite useful.
Those contended locks get very slow, very quickly and
these contention issues are actually generated by hardware
as the different cores need to keep things in sync with
their cache lines and they generate memory bus traffic.
So this is very slow and something else to keep in mind is
as I mentioned earlier atomic operations are kind of like
that destination address is its own little mini lock.
So for that reason atomic operations will actually
degrade in this same way, which is very badly,
if you have lots of threads all
containing of the same address.
The nice thing about atomic operations and the reason
why a lot of people have sort of this this feeling
that atomic operations are a lot faster
than locks is because they naturally kind
of encourage you to be locking many different addresses.
So an atomic operation is kind of like you're
using a separate lock for each address.
But you'll see a similar performance problem
if you start having many threads call an atomic
increment for instance than a same global.
So, in addition to I/O and locks we're going
to be using memory and any pending tasks
that aren't actually getting executed are
just sort of lying around consuming memory.
Now, blocks and queues in particular are cheap.
So that's very nice, but they're not completely free.
So we want to be careful about that.
Threads on the other hand, creating new threads is actually
very expensive, so we definitely don't want to do that.
So in a sense we obviously want to create a bunch of
separate tasks to leverage you know eight, sixteen cores
but at the same point in time if we only
have sixteen cores there isn't much point
in having thousands of pending tasks all queued up.
This is very inefficient use of memory.
So one way to think about this is sort
of a producer consumer style problem
where tasks are being consumed by
the cores as they get executed.
So we want to avoid overwhelming the consumer's queue.
And you know one of the easiest ways
to do that is just to have the tasks
and queue new tasks as sort of their last step.
So instead of spawning off thousands of tasks all at
once up front as each task gets finished its last step is
to enqueue the next series of subtasks and this is called
recursive decomposition and it's a fairly popular pattern.
Sometimes you can't necessarily do that
very conveniently and this would be a place
where you might use something called a future where you're
going to have a proxy for a whole collection of new tasks
and you won't actually materialize those tasks
until later where they're absolutely necessary.
So at that point in time then the future will be
responsible for enqueuing all those new tasks.
And as I mentioned a few times a lot of Cocoa applications
at this layer are going to use a very wide mix of resources
and for this reason along with the thread complexity
growing exponentially it's going to be hard to guess
up front necessarily how all of
these things are going to interact.
So it's going to be very important that you identify the
bottlenecks and that you start measuring these things
and that way to give you an idea about whether or
not more threads are actually going to help you.
If you're I/O bound more and more threads
is probably not going to help you very much.
So you're going to need to find a way to design your task so
that you're less I/O bound and in this way tools like Shark
and Instruments are great for design debugging, not just
performance debugging, but actually kind of identifying
where in your application you're hitting
bottlenecks and where it makes sense
to divide your application up further to use more cores.
So it makes it's actually quite valuable to actually
profile your app throughout the design cycle
as opposed to wait till the end.
And in this way, thread safety is not concurrency and
some of these resources are going to degrade very badly
so you'll pay a really high penalty for over
scheduling them, particularly I/O and locks.
You're going to want to avoid overwhelming
them and you might consider something
like the airline model where you
slightly overbook everything.
Ok, so in terms in balancing these two
things we want to manage the resources.
We don't want to pay too much and inefficiency for
coordinating between all the tasks we generate.
We also need to keep in mind some correctness
issues that catch people by surprise.
And all these things kind of sort of group together into
what I consider sort of a a theme for this session is
that something that surprises a lot of people new
to multi-thread programming is the most
efficient task granularity is really quite large
and there are a number of reasons for that.
Single threaded code has a lot of advantages; no locking,
no messaging, doesn't need to merge results together,
doesn't need to spend more memory to represent all
these pending tasks, there's no scheduling latency.
So in particular the Intel chips can do an awful lot of work
before you can actually even get another task scheduled.
On top of that serialized algorithms have been around for
a lot longer so they're often older and better researched
and optimal, not even optimized but actually optimal.
Serialized algorithms are widely available
in open source software or as part
of Mac OS X in the libraries available to you.
So we're all kind of producing this new journey into multi
core programming and so in some ways there's a little bit
of a learning curve for the entire system.
And one example of this this is concurrent string sorting
using Grand Central Dispatch and this is a very simple thing
where we have a huge list of strings and we're just sorting
them and in particular one thing you can see is that up
to roughly about 2,000 strings this
is sort of the break even point
at which actually the Intel chips can actually sort an awful
lot of strings before it's worth spinning up another core.
The other thing to take away from this diagram is the
concurrent version has this lower bound around a fixed point
and as you add more and more work to
the queue to sort larger and larger sets
of strings it actually performs roughly about the
same which is actually very graceful and you can see
that that reaches a point at which the the
serial system really just can't keep up
and degrades much worse as you add lots and lots of strings.
So this lower bound is what we're really
trying to achieve as we can add more features
and do more work for the same amount of time.
At the same point we need to when we divvy up our
application we need to maintain some correctness.
So what I mean by that is we have some implicit data
dependencies typically in our objects and we need
to avoid dividing a task so much that
we've broken our own assumptions.
So the assumptions typically involve multiple
different properties on a specific object.
Most objects actually assume that all their
properties are in sync with themselves.
So what I mean by this is if the properties were
truly independent of them even if you could set
and get them safely; if they were completely
independent and had no real relationship
to those other properties you probably would
have written that API as two separate objects.
This is something to know.
It's not always true but there's this tendency where
objects have a lot of assumptions about the state
that their different individual properties are in.
So as an example of this, sort of text
book example, is first and last names;
sending them on some kind of person object.
So we're using locks, so this is all Fred
safe, but it turns out that it's not correct.
So we're setting each part of the name independently and
in this case Thread 1 is trying to set set the person
to be Ali Ozer and Thread 2 is trying to set them
to be Ben Trumball and we jumble these things around
and on my poor poorly karma inflicted
engineers machine we get this execution order
in which nobody has really come out ahead.
So even though we've used locks and we've set each
of these properties independently the truth is these
properties really should never be set independently
because we have this assumption that the person is going
to have a consistency between these two properties.
So that leaves us where Ali has become Ali and not
only have we successfully set the name incorrectly
but we have also implicitly changed the
gender of this person to my dear cousin.
So, as an overview, course grain tasks are going
to have less contention, there are fewer of them
so they're going to use resources more efficiently.
You're going to amortize the coordination costs between
these systems and there are going to be fewer independencies
between these tasks overall making
them much easier to debug.
On the other hand, it's going to be
more difficult to load balance all
of these tasks because they are larger grain tasks.
So for instance if we only had one really large
task we're not going to get any concurrency
and if we only had two tasks we're going
to be limited to as many as two cores.
So as we reduce the granularity of these
tasks we have more scheduling opportunities
and we can load balance all of these tasks better.
Typically there's better responsiveness at the same time
we're we're trading off for more coordination costs.
So these tasks are going to have to communicate
between each other more and typically do more locking.
As your adjusting these knobs in your tasks and
in your applications you're going to want to focus
on the primary bottlenecks in these tasks.
So, it it doesn't make necessarily much sense to optimize
for CPU efficiency until you've dealt with I/O bottlenecks.
You're going to want to manage the complexity of
your applications just as much as the performance.
So having something that is really fast that you
can never debug is not going to be very helpful
and in the future you'll probably
learn about more advanced techniques.
Lockless programming techniques lock striping, things
like this and in general you're not going to want
to sprinkle those throughout your application.
You're going to want to reserve
them for the most crucial problems.
So that's why something simple like locking or like
isolation is going to be your bread and butter for divvying
up your tasks and overall you're definitely going to want
to avoid guessing up front as your applications tasks
for most applications are going
to use a whole range of resources.
In particular you'll want to keep in mind the break even
threshold at which point it actually makes sense to spin
up other cores to help you for a
particular task and that's going to depend
on the resources and again the coordination costs.
So that brings us to something that trips up a lot
of Cocoa application programmers and
that's multithread notifications.
Notifications are a very important piece of Cocoa
programming and unfortunately it can be a little tricky
to make these work well with lots of
threads, or in the new world order, queues.
So most threads are delivered synchronously
NSNotification, key value observing by default.
The observer actions that you register are
going to executed in the observee's thread.
So from the perspective of an observing thread that has
a registration to observe notifications on a object owned
by another thread the visibility of those
changes is going to appear pretty random.
And the problem that comes up with this with this
synchronous notification delivery is if Thread 2 registers
to receive notifications for an object known by thread 1
what ends up happening is Thread 1 posts a notification,
the NSNotification center or the key value observing
mechanism is going to go through the call backs.
It's going to call the method that Thread 2 has registered
in the context of Thread 1 and then typically this is
where things go array and that callback is now operating
of Thread 2's data even though Thread 2 is somewhere
else operating on the data at the same time.
So this is where the shared memory approach
can be really perilous and you're going to want
to exercise a particular amount of self
discipline And because of sort of the features
of the notification design pattern where
there's an API between the observer
and the object posting its notifications that abstraction
actually causes there to be a lot of dependencies
between these two threads because the
notifications can come pretty much at any time.
So the behavior is actually particularly
non-deterministic and if the observing thread is attempting
to implement something like isolation
then obviously this will break.
And in particular when we talk about the complexity
to remind you that notification is happening sort
of randomly throughout your application is really going
to run into this wall where different threads are going
to interleave in many many different combinations.
So the natural response to this is to to go to sort of our
old standby which is to add some locks and this ends badly.
It typically ends so badly that it needs
to be the first bullet point on this slide.
And the reason is when we have all these locks
we want to set an order to having these locks,
to manage multiple different locks but the API boundaries,
the very feature of creating a notification system defeats
that where the object posting the notification
doesn't even know about the observers at all,
the NS notification center is the
one that knows about the observers
and the observers themselves their notification actions
can be fairly complicated and might need yet more locks.
So the way notifications work prevent us
from really creating a defined locking order
for all the different locks we might want
to use as part of a notification system.
This makes it particularly prone to deadlock.
Anybody who has tried to do this will will
have experience many deadlocks in this kind
of multithreaded notification system and I
apologize this last line is a little typo.
The observers often post a new notification during
the callback and this is especially problematic
because the callbacks are happening synchronously.
So when an observer posts a new notification, so maybe
it changed a value which creates a new KVINotification,
or it runs something, it creates a new NSNotification,
the entire chain of locks that are being used
in the first notification are still being held.
Ok so, locking doesn't work very
well with multi-thread notifications.
So we'll go to our other standby which is to use isolation
and when we've combined association message passing
for the purposes of notifications we
call this the receptionist pattern.
And the key point here is the observer's indirect
so the observing studies is a proxy and the observee
and the observer are isolated in the first thread
and the observer's proxy then uses message passing
to let the second thread know that
a notification has occurred.
So this looks much healthier.
Basically, the the notification system instead of calling
the action you've registered it's going to use a proxy
for the second thread and that will enqueue a message
and at some point in time Thread 2 will process
that message queue and then handle the notification itself.
So this is much easier to manage than using
shared memory to directly make state changes
into objects owned by Thread 2 during notification.
The initial notification is completely isolated into
the observee's thread so the observer proxy has a chance
to work the notification data and wrap it up in such
a way that it can be enqueued for the second thread
and at a safe point in time in the future the
observing thread will process that message queue.
There's some new API in Snow Leopard, NS NotificationCenter,
which actually kind of makes this a little bit easier to do.
So here you can register a block to be an observer and
it actually takes a queue for you so you can specify
that when the notification is generated that you
want the block to be executed on a specific queue.
So the notification posting is still happening synchronously
but this queue could be a queue that is working
with the second thread a little more closely.
And because notifications are such an important part of
Cocoa programming there's going to be a lot more going
on in the Cocoa tips and tricks
session which will be on Thursday at 5
and there will be a much more extensive
example about using the receptionist pattern.
But the summary is queues make really good receptionists.
And once you've set up a receptionist you can keep in
mind that actually a bunch of other things you can do now
that those notifications are no
longer being processed synchronously.
You can filter and coalesce them pretty easily as you're
processing the message queue on that second thread.
You might even reprioritize them.
The most common thing you'll do though is
you'll start throwing away still notifications
because the second thread is doing its
own set of work and they might decide
that it no longer cares about a particular notification.
It might be say from an object that is now de-allocated.
As we're pushing these notifications around and they
have data that the threads want we need to keep in mind
that passing data between threads can get a little tricky.
We don't necessarily know when the
receiver of that data will run.
It might happen so basically the sender might
lose lose access to the core it might be scheduled
out immediately upon passing the message along.
So the receiver might finish with the data and release
it before the sender gets the chance to do anything.
Or the receiver might experience a problem,
either a page fault or some I/O latency
and it might start many seconds later in the future
long after the sender itself is done using that object.
So there's really a very simple rule to keep these
objects alive as you pass data between threads
and that's the sender is going to retain
and the receiver is going to release.
This is just as true when you're passing dispatch queues
and dispatch objects around as it is at the Cocoa layer.
So the sender is going to retain one's for
each of the receivers that pass along too
and each of the receivers is going to get
sort of an ownership of a retain account.
So you're transferring one specific instance
of a retain from the sender to the receiver.
And this way no matter what order the
senders and the receivers get scheduled
in these data objects will remain alive until both
the sender and the receiver are done with them.
Which brings to key value observing which is a little
bit different from the NSNotificationCenter style.
Because we're observing specific properties there's just
sort of a natural tendency that these notifications get
to be smaller and because of their size that can be
challenging to fit in with sort of the minimum granularity
that we want to pass over to another thread.
We really want to achieve that sort of break even threshold
of communicating with other threads and if there's a lot
of them, if we're observing a lot of properties and
a lot of objects there can be a fairly high volume
of these notifications which in many
ways is a feature but as we work
with different threads it's something to keep in mind.
So in that sense KVO works best with isolation.
Here the observers and the observees are all
confined to a specific thread and we've amortized all
of these coordination costs because
well we're not actually passing any
of the individual KVO notifications
over to a different thread.
So that's sort of how things work in sort of an idealized
world where most applications actually aren't being written.
So in order to start passing all these notification data
over to other threads with KVO typically what you'll want
to first is to coalesce all of these things together
so you'll have a bunch of KVO notifications happening
on one thread and when they reach a certain point of
usefulness repackaged as a batch together then you'll pass
that over to the other thread to work
with a larger granularity of data.
So this is just sort of an example
of kind of how the natural tendency
to use these two notification systems differs a little bit.
The NSNotificationsTypically are a little less frequent
and a little larger grained so they often fit naturally
into granularity a little better and KVO on many
properties on many objects is a little finer grained.
So they have their different systems but they both
as multi-thread notification systems have the same
overall behavior they're all synchronously posted.
So an example of using KVO with
multiple threads is in core data.
So here the manage objects and the manage object context
so each of these manage objects if you're not familiar
with core data; these are basically objects representing
rows in a database and the context is a transaction scope.
It's observing all of these particular
objects and it's required
that each thread have its own context
and its own peer set of objects.
So all the changes that you make to the properties on
these objects and all the KVO notifications are happening
within a single thread and the manage object context
is observing all of these objects coalesces all
of these changes together and at the end of the particular
event it repackages them up to a courser grain notification
and posts an NSNotification talking about
sort of a higher level all the things
that have happened over the course of a particular event.
And that's probably the right level of
granularity for most people to pass off
to a receptionist and hand that off to another thread.
So each of the context model objects are
being confined to a single thread here.
The properties are all completely observable
within a thread; all of the properties
and they can be changed quite frequently
without any real performance hit.
And the context is accumulating all of these changes to the
end of the event and then it reposts them later as a batch.
So in particular as you're working with multi-threaded
notifications you're going to want to avoid locking, a lot.
You're going to probably need to
use something like message passing
and the receptionist pattern is
a really easy way of doing that.
Queues, dispatch queues and NS
operation queues make good receptionists.
And as you're working with a lot of
notifications if you have a high volume
of notifications you're definitely
going to want to coalesce them together.
So this brings us to some specific
challenges talking about the UI.
This happens in Cocoa a lot that should be brought
up as we're working with dividing our tasks in Cocoa.
Specifically the UI is single threaded.
This is actually true for most commercial UI's.
Multi-threaded UI's have a tendency to end up
deadlocking and the reason for this is the same problem
that notification systems have with using locks is
the different layers of API make it very difficult
to create a consistent lock ordering which is
what we need to manage multiple independent locks
and there are two different vectors at which multi-threaded
UI's suffer this inconsistent lock ordering problem.
The actions being generated by an
application flow in two different directions.
So the user is going to be generating events through
the keyboard, the mouse and so forth which get handed
over to the operating system which then in
turn fields them as events to the application.
At the same time the application is generating its own
events which get passed over to the operating system
and then to external devices, saving
files, drawing to the screen and so forth
And the model view controller design pattern
itself experiences a certain similar issue
where the controller talks to the view and
the view might be querying state on your model
or the controller might be talking to your
model which is generating change notifications
and the view might be involved in those too.
So it's hard to come up with one lock ordering
that works as these things flow in both directions.
For this reason most of UI's prefer thread confinement.
They're they're using isolation for the core tasks and in
Cocoa in particular the UI is bound to the main thread.
The main thread is blessed and this is where most
of your work with views and with controllers,
in particular Cocoa bindings, is all going
to need to be confined to the main thread.
In another way I've seen a number of people, so I want
to call this out specifically, a number of people attempt
to fix this by adding locks and the problem is that
AppKit and Cocoa bindings doesn't know about your locks
so if you do something like you add locks to say valueForKey
on your model objects it can really be it's pretty
much impossible to find all the different places
where DUI might be expecting to be working with
those objects, confined to the main thread,
simply because it doesn't know about your locks.
None of its code is going to be expecting your locks.
So that sounds unfortunate however
it's not really that bleak.
In particular the UI can dispatch all kinds of
operations quite efficiently off the main thread
to different work queues, to get you more responsiveness.
And you know frequently in the past a lot of
people have done this kind of thing using runLoops
to move I/O intensive operations
out of the main flow of control
and these days these things are really the most common
kinds of tasks that you use separate threads for.
So the key challenges we're sending off these
other tasks that are generated by the UI
to background operations is merging those
results cooperatively back into the UI
and that's basically message passing which I
talked about a little bit earlier and you're going
to dispatch these things either onto the
main queue or you're going to do something
like performing a selector on the main thread.
So here's an example of what this might look like.
This is using blocks on Snow Leopard
with NS operation queue.
And you'd have a background queue in this case my
app queue and it's going to add a new operation
that performs a very long task and the last thing that that
task does is it's going to get a reference to the main queue
and then it's going to enqueue whatever code is
necessary to merge those results back into the UI.
So this is a really pretty simple pattern and you're
going to see a lot of this with Grand Central Dispatch.
If you want to see using the same pattern directly to
Grand Central Dispatch here are the functions you'd use
to dispatch asynchronously to a concurrent queue.
Perform your long task there and then dispatch
asynchronously back to the main queue.
Ok, so to summarize, you're going to want to decompose
all of your tasks above that break even threshold
where splitting up additional cores is going
to help you solve specific problems faster.
And as you do that you're going to want to
consider the resource limitations you have.
You don't want to add too much contention over
things like I/O or locks and you're going to want
to avoid excessive coordination, particularly passing along
a high volume of very small notifications for instance,
is going to generate a lot of inefficiency.
And as you're tuning application for performance you're
similarly going to want to keep in mind that you really need
to prune the complexity back from these applications.
So some, some really good reading material here.
Mac OS X "The Threading Programming Guide" talks a lot
about what's available in the Mac OS X environment;
Cocoa as well as lower level pieces of the operating system.
This is a great resource.
It talks about using runLoops as well as threads directly.
Another thing that's available to you is an article called
"Real World Concurrency" and it's written by two people
from Sun and it's it's a great article looking at their
experiences with engineering multi-threading systems
and some of the same kinds of things
that I've talked about today.
Some of it in a little more in depth but these guys
have done some really sophisticated multithreading work
and again you know they talk about reserving very
complicated systems for your core problems and focusing
on getting a lot of tasks simply decomposed and
working concurrently using fairly basic mechanisms.
Another article which is one of my favorite articles for
exploring the complexity multi-threading programming to kind
of go into a little more detail about why all of this
is really so cumbersome is from Edward Lee at Berkeley
and it's called "The Problem With Threads," so
it's another article you can get on the internet.
And it goes into a lot of detail about what is so difficult
with this multi-threaded programming and exploring how
to control all of those different
permutations that I showed little graphs for.
And that brings us then to two hard cover books.
One is "Java Concurrency in Practice" and I realize
we're not actually talking about Java, however,
a lot of this is relevant no matter what programming
language you're in and it's one of the first books
that I read that's focused on actual software engineering
practices with concurrency which is a nice change of pace
from API references or text books for people
learning how to you know how to implement locks
without actually having any locks and other
things which might be academically fascinating
but aren't particularly relevant to what we need
to do today and finally there's the last book
"Pattern Language for Parallel Programming."
And this book is nice in that it gives an overview about
lots of other different kinds of ways to decompose tasks
so we focused today pretty much on one general purpose thing
called task based parallelism and that's great for a lot
of Cocoa applications but as you start working with
this you'll find that you'll you'll be interested
in exploring other ways of decomposing your application
and to have a nice survey of lots of different techniques
and design patterns for subdividing
an application and specific problems.
So there's a lot of good advice in there.
It's a little dry but it provides a nice overview.